# Cantillon Bubbles
## *i.e., Bitcoin's Inflation Problem*


## Inflation
Could an ideal money be inflationary?
That is, if inflation is truly healthy, let's say, by whatever percent is an ideal annual growth rate of a given economy, then yes, one could increase the block reward such that miners get paid more and not less, incentivizing future investments into mining. But why save? Because your purchasing power will, on average, never change. Prices may still decrease over time due to efficiency improvements as the larger economy grows, but nothing as dramatic as deflationary money like Bitcoin. Relatively stable prices over time would be an obvious advantage, and are the basis of much of MMT. Although in practice, prices increase under fiat, a decentralized alternative currency could potentially avoid those pitfalls. Ironically, the biggest threat to such inflationary money is Bitcoin itself.
Why hold an inflationary asset when a scarce one exists? Bitcoin supply is fixed, meaning there is zero possible inflation, ever. The smart money will find its way to the hardest asset. The only way to do better is deflationary currency, money whose supply can shrink and never be recovered. So rather than 21.million, something that slowly decreases, say, to 18.million, and so on. But it can't be random or a source of centralization, no one would store wealth in something that might disappear for reasons that could never have been adequately prevented. And the total supply can't disappear, but the total supply could be reduced without end, so long as the remaining supply is infinitely divisible. That is, if only 1 Bitcoin still existed. Or only 1 Satoshi...
If, in this hypothetical 1.sat economy, someone discovers keys to an entire Bitcoin. Well, that is now an inflationary event. Increasing the money supply, and at the benefit of those nearest to the new supply.
The biggest threat to Bitcoin is not lost keys but rather found keys that were once believed to have been lost. The damages of such an inflationary event are the very damages of fiat itself. The only better version of Bitcoin is one where "lost" coins are in fact known to be lost. Such a system would be truly deflationary in a provable way. Perhaps a future BIP will provide means to do so, but such a feat is beyond this author's current understanding. Perhaps a voluntary system where one can prove ownership but also that if keys are ever found, the funds are redistributed evenly across the network. Or a null account that destroys any Bitcoin sent to it? Such ideas have maddeningly difficult consequences and would not altogether solve the lost Bitcoin problem. How do I know it's truly lost? In a trustless system, I don't, not without verifiable proof. This means I will act as if Satoshi's coins are active, that they're part of the active supply, and that at any minute they will be used. In the 1.sat world, it is still operating under the assumption of a fixed 21.million, but only a tiny fraction of the supply is active in the market. The market in such a scenario must safeguard against the introduction of new sats, up to the max. The max is still known. So even in that situation it's better than infinite fiat. But, for this reason, Bitcoin can act as a truly deflationary money, but at a risk of inflationary events anytime "lost" coins are "found".

A hypothetical zero inflation money, always 21.million and nothing ever lost, this would be weaker than Bitcoin, which is guaranteed to be deflationary as coins are lost or even deliberately destroyed. Yet this guarantee comes with a risk of "found" keys, that is, sudden increases in the effective money supply, cantillon bubbles that could be destabilizing.
Bitcoin's cantillon risk.
